Trying to find where I might go in terms of career
was influenced by my brother, really, to consider
fisheries. We were both at San Diego State College
at that time, and we were sort of looking at various
alternatives. And he happened to run across a
booklet from the University of Washington that
described the College of Fisheries at that time. I
guess it was a department.
And I became interested after I read the brochure.
And quite frankly, I thought fisheries had
something to do with running fish hatcheries and
things at that period of time. And anyway, my wife
and I came up here in 1946 and essentially
got into the University of Washington. And I guess
that started my career into fisheries, which
ultimately sort of branched out into a broad range
of fisheries and oceanographic activities. Were
you reared close to the sea?
Yeah. I actually grew up in a number of seaports. I
was a small boy. I lived out on Tatoosh Island,
which is the furthest, most northwesterly island
in the United States before Alaska was added, of
course. Lived out in the Hawaiian Islands. And I
guess as long as I could remember, it was in the
water in one form or the other, either in a small
boat or swimming. And had my own outrigger canoe
when I lived in the Hawaiian Islands. We lived in
Japan and the Philippines and always on the sea. So
I guess that there was an attachment and
association with the oceans from a very young age.
What did you do in China during the war? You just
have intelligence service listed. Well, the
China story is rather an interesting one. It's one
that was ultimately written up and called the Rice
Paddy Navy. During World War II, Chiang Kai-shek
did not really get along very well with certain
elements of the U.S. government. And as you
recall, the only U.S. forces allowed in China were
the 14th Air Force. The relationship between the
Air Force was quite good. There were no U.S. ground
forces in China. Chang saw a need, however,
apparently, for some American forces in terms of
training, in terms of guerrilla-type
activities, and through a very close friend he had
in the Navy, Admiral Miles, an arrangement was set
up to essentially have the Navy send in groups of
their people who were at least on paper
transferred over to the Chinese National Forces.
And this became a group that worked in demolition,
coastal observations, weather services, and
were spread almost throughout China. And that was
my type of activity. It was a broad range of
intelligence type of thing and demolition and you
might say running warfare. No weather alerting
then? Because they also established a series of
minerals. Yes, we did. As a component to our,
wherever we had a group, we had about eight major
groups stationed all the way from the Gobi Desert
all the way down to southeast China. We also had
meteorologists with us, so we had meteorological
units with us. Sometimes they had to run like the
rest of us, so they picked up their equipment and
gear and moved from here to there. Did you know
Spillhouse when he was in China? I did not know
Spillhouse personally. I did have a chance to meet
with Chang and General Dai Li, which was sort of
his, I guess, Gestapo of the Chinese system at that
time, and other key Chinese officials. But you
were not suggesting that your activities in China
had any direct effect upon taking you into, or back
into the sea, or back to the sea? No, no way. I think
it was just an interlude in my activities. like
most of our Army careers, an unnecessary evil,
which occurred. So now, when you leave then the
University of San Diego, or San Diego State, and
come to the University of Washington, did you
enter graduate work then? Undergraduate. I had
only had about, I guess I finished about a year and
maybe one semester. San Diego State was on the
semester system. And then I came up here, I think,
in mid-semester and started in the fall of 1946,
I believe, into the University
of Texas. Now, there wasn't even an undergraduate
school of oceanography here at all in 1946. It's
yet to be organized. So what did you major and work
in? Well, in essence, at that time, I essentially
took largely fisheries with some oceanographic
courses as a background, but I really did not take a
great deal of work in the area of such a physical
oceanography, chemical oceanography, until I
got into graduate studies. And with whom did you
work? In undergraduate work? Undergraduate
work. Well, largely at that time I worked under old
Dean Chapman, Webb Chapman, who was a very famous
individual in the field of fisheries
notionography, who was the dean of the college or
the department at that time. Later became one of
the first head in the State Department for
Fisheries in the United States in the post that was
established there, and later was a key element in
the international affairs through the Van Camp
Foundation. He died several years ago, as you
probably know. He was the dean. I guess the key
professors that I worked under were Dr.
Waylander,
Dr. DeLacy. I suppose those were the two key people
that I was most closely associated with in the my
undergraduate career. I did know Dr. Barnes
fairly well at that time, because I did start going
over and taking some courses from the
oceanography department. And Dr. Barnes was one
of the old, well, been entrenched over there for a
great number of years. He was a teacher both when I
was there as an undergraduate and when I came back
almost a decade later into graduate studies.
After you received your degree in fisheries then,
the first degree you received in fisheries, you
joined the government service almost at once, did
you not? Right, but during my college years in the
summer, really the first job I had in fisheries
that really I sort of was a break-in sort of job for
me and really led me into the ocean end of it rather
into such areas as fish culture and that sort of
area was that I was stationed one summer down at
Astoria, Oregon, under the Oregon Department of
Fisheries. And my job was, in essence, to beg rides
on the trawl fish vessels to carry out a tragging
program. We had no research vessels that are owned
at that time, and we used to put our, essentially,
tagging boxes on board the back of a trawler if they
had the proper pumps to get the water circulated
into them. get permission from the skipper to go on
board and offer to help stand watches and help sort
the catch as a part of the pay to go out and tag fish.
And that was sort of my first exposure really in
terms of ocean activity. And believe me, it was one
that I think that I'll never forget because I spent
time on, you know, like about every boat that I
could climb on, 30 or 40 different boats. And if you
want to see a wide variety of a different type of
human life is to go on a fishing fleet, you know,
everything from people that are drunks to college
graduates to people that can't say two words
without swearing to some very sophisticated
individuals. It was a very diversified type of
population. One charge that's been levied really
by colleagues of yours has been that one of the
problems with the young oceanographers is they
don't go to sea often enough. Don't get their feet
wet is the phrase that's usually used. Would you
agree with this? Well, I think there's a place, of
course, in today's world that relates to the
people that are associating with, let's say, the
mathematical aspects of modeling that probably
doesn't require that type of exposure. But I think
that if I had my druthers, I would like to think that
all of my young people had at least been exposed to
going to sea, both on commercial and research
vessels, and had some appreciation of the quality
of data in the problems of operating at sea, the
problems that the fishermen confront, because I
do think it would give them a better perception of
essentially that database they were working
with. And I think I somewhat resent a good number of
the young people that come in to becoming
oceanographers. would like to sit and make all
sorts of value judgments on the basis of the data
and who have never been to sea and who have never
seen the problems or don't have that sort of
appreciation for what that data is likely to mean.
So do you work all of your summers now during this
hour tagging off fishing vessels? During that
period of time? Yeah. I did only the first summer.
And then when I came back, and graduated in 1950
from the university. I came over to this building
and started in a job, what they called at that time,
a fishers gear engineer and gear specialist. I've
even forgotten the title, but some title of that
sort. Equipment and gear specialist. In essence,
which our job was an old group called exploratory
fishing. And exploratory fishing wasn't very
scientifically oriented at that time. period of
time. It was sort of go out and throw out the net and
see if you can find fish in an area that essentially
somebody else hasn't fished before, and somebody
didn't realize there were resources in that area.
Of course, subsequent to that, over a period of
perhaps five years, it became a very
sophisticated type of activity. But my first job
was in this exploratory fishing, where we went out
aboard both commercial and research vessels, and
in essence tried to find the animal complexes that
weren't subject to commercial exploitation and
to try to decide what latent resources were there
for future use by the U.S. fishing industry and by
the American public and the world in general. How
did you make contact with the Bureau of Fisheries
in 1950? Did you know someone over here? I had a very
good friend who had graduated the year before.
who'd come into the exploratory fishing group, a
fellow named Don Powell. And Don encouraged me to
come with the exploratory fishing group as a good
friend in college. And I rather liked the sound of
the adventurous nature of going out and carrying
out sort of explorations in the ocean. And he
talked me into coming with the group. How long did
you spend at sea during this period? Oh, boy.
period that I was with the government, and I think
that was roughly about three and a half years that I
was with them. Maybe I have to look at my records,
but
I guess I was at sea pretty much a minimum of 100 to
140 days a year, so a lot of time at sea.
Now, you're right. You spent about three, three
and a half years with them. And then you leave them
and go on to look at something differently. What
did you look at and why? Well, there was a couple of
reasons I left then. I left really because I was not
happy with certain policies that were in terms of
management that related to the then manager or
director of the exploratory unit. who I at that
time felt took too much of a haphazard approach to
carrying out the surveys and the activities, and
that there was a failure to document the data
properly and in the manner that it should be, and
that we weren't making the range of observations
that I thought felt were important and that we
could make with really out any additional layout
in terms of funds or effort. And we sort of had a
conflict. He was a gentleman that had essentially
grown up without a scientific background. I don't
say that he didn't have some good qualities,
because he did, but he didn't have any real
appreciation for science, and I guess I was a
scientist, and then our paths sort of collided in
that sense, and I decided to look elsewhere, and at
that time went over to the Washington Department
of Fisheries to take charge of their commercial
fish or ground fish studies. And? What was the
Washington Department of Fisheries? Washington
Department of Fisheries is the state agency here
in the state of Washington that's responsible for
many of the fishing activities in the state of
Washington. And they have a small research group
that essentially developed the database upon
which to make decisions, which I became
associated with. They were also the enforcement
officers set up state regulations, govern the
salmon fisheries, etc. So, in effect, you're
going from deep sea oceanography to sort of inland
and coastal oceanography, aren't you? Yeah, to an
extent, except I asked to be associated with the
offshore trawl fishery, which operated
essentially from... central Washington up to the
northern tip of Vancouver, so I still had pretty
much an ocean activity. It was the small part, by
the way, you're right, of the total research
program. Most everything else was associated
with salmon and inshore activities. It was the
only sort of ocean program that the state was
supporting, and I think I had two people that
worked with me on that particular project. Now,
you stayed with this project how long? Same with
that project, roughly five years. And really, I
think it's the project that shaped my future
outlook and dimensions in terms of where I might
go. Because again, I got some very earthy
experience in that group. My first job was to set up
a central interview system with the fishermen to
set up a, in fact, I think it was the first
application of information collected from a
broad range of the fishing industry into the
computer system. Those computers were just
getting into being. And I saw the use of using the
computer system of storing a great deal of both
biological and statistical information, which
is still in use, by the way, by the state in terms of
making management decisions. And through that
interview system, one of the first job was to go
down and actually interview every skipper that
was landing his catches in the state of
Washington. In addition to the traditional
things of organizing studies that related to
tagging and migrations and population dynamics,
I also had to set up a system of collecting basic raw
material from the fishermen on which we would have
a better basis to make judgments. And I just think I
learned a lot from fishermen. I learned a lot from
my exposure to these people and their leadership
in the industry. I learned a lot about the ocean. I
learned a lot about fish by going out onto their
boats. And I think that from that time on, I was
wedded to a program in the oceans itself and in the
sea. OK. And do you do essentially this same job for
five years? My job was to direct this program. I
guess those five years I... Yeah, right. And you
were saying my job was essentially to... Yeah, my
job was essentially to put together the
scientific information, I guess, upon which the
managers could make decisions. And I guess that's
when I really got into the publication there. I
began from... to develop some very lengthy
monograms that related to the ground fish and
commercial fish complex or commercial fish
complex off the coast here. Their behavior
phenomena that I could detect from the statistics
that the fishermen were submitting to
themselves. In fact, one of the first, and I think
one of the very good papers I've ever done was on the
seasonal behavioral patterns of ground fish. It
resulted from my collection of about three years
of the data from the commercial fisheries and then
examining how the various species were moving in a
bathymetric sense throughout the year, which was
subsequently published as a major monograph. And
that's where that monograph came from. I was going
to ask that question you just answered. It came
from research done there. So you think then the
move into I don't want to use the word academic
oceanography because that's not even fair. And
first of all, that's not what you do. But you think
that the move into producing hard science in terms
of publishing comes from this period right here? I
think that was the stimulus, yes. That was the
period. And that's when I began to sort of reaffirm
my attachments over at the university by going
over and reviewing the various papers I was
developing with some of my old professors, with
the people over there. Well, that also answers
another question. The next question I was going to
ask you, is this the beginning of the direction
going back to graduate school? Because you
returned to graduate school rather late, as many
of us did. You know, I'm going to make a harsh
statement here. By the time I had finished five
years, I had probably published as much in my field
Many PhDs have published sometimes in a career.
And I got a little tired of going to meetings and
saying, but doctor so-and-so says. It was quite
obvious to me that that attachment to that degree
carried a great deal of weight. I think it's
unfortunate in some instances, because it does.
We
have 15 seconds later now. I don't think you need
to. Where were we, by the way? We were just
finishing up the State of Washington. Well, not
really. You were commenting that on publication,
where we were. And you were saying that it became a
little exasperating to go to a meeting and
discover that without a PhD that your comments
didn't receive the credence they should have.
They didn't receive the weight that certainly
some people who had a PhD and hadn't done any work in
that field. It was a little bit exasperating.
You're right. And I finally said to somebody, I
said, well, because that's the way they play the
game, I'm going to go get back and get that shingle.
Yeah. And so that's when you begin to make the
decision to go back and take a PhD. I was
influenced, by the way, very strongly by my boss in
Washington at that time.
That's just after I left fisheries and came back
with the federal service. I had a fellow named
Stewart back there that just said, you know, I
think you ought to go back and get a PhD. And as far as
I'm concerned, the government will make time for
you to go back and get it. He said that until you do,
you aren't going to be able to play the game with the
big boys in the way you'd like to. This must be 58,
right? That's right. And what are you doing in 58?
58, I've left the Department of Fisheries again
because I have sort of a history of this. I'm fairly
independent in my attitudes, and if I feel that I
cannot honestly work for a manager and support his
philosophies, then rather than grumble down at
the bar, I go and essentially meet with that
individual and say that, you know, tell him what
the problem is. If we can't rectify it, I
essentially leave. And when there was a new
director of fisheries came on, only Milo Moore
that I'm still a very good friend in, but had
certain policies in the way of using scientists
more in the basis of to support political
decisions rather than develop science that I just
essentially couldn't live with. And in essence,
he and I had a confrontation. And I decided that I
wasn't going to prosper very much any longer under
the Department of Fisheries. left the Department
of Fisheries along with many other good
scientists. At that time, there was a major sort of
exodus from the Washington Department of
Fisheries of perhaps 15 or 20 of their best
scientists at that time for the same reasons. He
was an individual who felt that he didn't need
scientists. And where he did need them, he needed
them to parrot what his philosophies were rather
than what the data said. And as a result, many
people left. I came back and started to work for,
under the same individual, replacing, excuse me,
the individual that got me into this business. Mr.
Powell had been here, went to Washington, and I
came and replaced him and took over as sort of
director of the exploratory fishing group here in
1958. And that's when you decided, I take it then
you must have gone to work on your Ph.D. part-time?
I guess it was about six months after I came back
that I made the commitment. And at that time, I
started on a part-time basis. And I think I only
took one quarter off. I had to have some regulation
that related to residency period, and I had to take
one one quarter off. But the remainder of that, I
sort of, and it's not a very good way to go through a
PhD program, but I struggled through a good number
of years on sort of a part-time program. Yeah, it is
not a very pleasant way to receive a degree. It's a
lousy way. And believe me, I don't encourage it
because it is a stress on you and a stress on keeping
your job going. And I don't think you do quite the
job that you could do that if you were off on a
full-time basis. I don't think I suffered any in my
grades or anything, but nevertheless, I could
have done a better job. Now, what were you doing in
terms of job occupation at this time? At that time,
I was directing the exploratory group, which by
that time, remember I said I wasn't happy with it
when I left, allowed me to sort of provide a whole
new philosophy of what exploratory fishing meant
in terms of both answering questions the interest
of the academic community, at the same time
providing valuable data to the industry upon
which they could make decisions. I was convinced
both needs could be met, where my former boss felt
that you really couldn't do the science because in
order to tell a fisherman he could catch so many
pounds of fish in certain areas, you could only
handle it one way. And I just didn't believe this.
And we developed a whole new philosophical base.
And then I was able to attract. some real good
scientists into the program. I attracted Dr.
Pereira into the program from the University of
Washington, who became a mainstay of that program
later. Just a number of good scientists came into
the program and it became, you know, and I have to
say I have a bias, but it became a very productive
group in terms of publications, in terms of the
fisheries communities throughout the
northeastern Pacific and the oceanography of the
area.
How long did you stay with this program? I stayed
with that program until—and here, you know, my
dates are going to bother me, but I guess it was
sometime in the late Or in 1969, you become
associate director of Fishers. Okay, I was
reaching for the date. I knew it was in the late 60s.
I was there almost a decade, and that program in
that period of time grew from roughly five
individuals, which is what it was when I came to it.
to one that had about 25 individuals and a
full-time vessel assignment to it, and was
essentially making and providing the basic
documents and scientific publications upon
which we entered into our early negotiations with
Japan for resolution of some of the high seas
fishing programs in that area. And it was these
publications that served as the basis of our
negotiations. Well, that was almost the complete
database For our early work, when we had to go to
Japan in terms of trying to re-establish a
rational fishery for bottom fish off our coast in
the Bering Sea, it was almost totally based on the
work that we had done over the past decade. Well, I
was going to ask you something about Japanese
fishing anyway, by the way. And so I want to break
away from chronological approach right now and
ask you a couple of things. Will American
fishermen ever be able to compete with the
Japanese? Yes, they are now. in part because the
200-mile limit provides certain preferential
rights, and in part because the 200-mile limit, if
properly managed...
...going to raise the abundance level of these
fishes until they can be competitive.
In essence,
one sees that happening now, by
the way. We were making a few comments about
competition with Japan. Oh, OK. And I ask you if we
can ever compete. In certain areas. I'm convinced
it's going to be a long time where we can compete for
low-priced, high-volume bottom fish like
pollock, like redfish, like codfish. But for
certain key target species like the crustacean
complex, I'm going to forecast within a decade
we're going to be taking utilities in the full
surplus that's available in the Bering Sea of all
the crabs, of all the shrimp. That fishery is just
booming right now. The fact is it increased 100% in
one year. The ex-vessel value of the raw material
taken out of the Bering Sea for crabs this last year
was close to $80 million, U.S. And so the
foreigners are going to be out of business.
They're just not going to be there. Other species
of finfish, of course halibut, there's no
problem. The one I see us moving into very rapidly
is black cod, which is a high-valued local species
here, which has produced about 60 million pounds,
which has largely gone to Japan. which my guess is
we'll be reducing the total potential of that also
within the next 5 to 10 years. That fishery is
growing very rapidly. We're now competitive. We
have the gear. We have the boats. The price is up to a
range where our fishermen can afford to go out and
catch it.